The 2010 Kyiv Victory Day Parade was held on May 9, 2010, in Kyiv, honoring the 65th anniversary of the Soviet Union's victory in the Great Patriotic War (in 2015 Ukraine altered this day to Victory Day over Nazism in World War II and in 2023 abolished it all together). Military vehicles and soldiers dressed in Soviet Army uniforms marched on Khreschatyk Street and  through Maidan Nezalezhnosti. Inspecting the parade was the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces General of the Army Ivan Svyda while the commander of the Ukrainian Ground Forces, Colonel General Henadii Vorobiov commanded the parade. The decree for holding the parade was signed on 23 March of that year. The President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych delivered a jubilee address in his position as Supreme Commander. 2,500 members of the Ukrainian Armed Forces as well as troops from Russia and Belarus (the former being represented by the 45th Guards Spetsnaz Brigade taking part in a joint contingent with the Ukrainian Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky Independent Presidential Guard Regiment) took part in the parade. 17 military bands took part in the parade under the command of the Chief of the Military Music Department of the General Staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, Major General Volodymyr Derkach.


== Full order of march past ==
Historical Contingent
First part
Colors Party composed of the Flag of Ukraine and the Victory Banner
Kyiv Presidential Honor Guard Battalion
Historical colors
Front Standard bearers
Second part
Vehicles of the Soviet Armed Forces (led by the Ukrainian-made T-34)
Red Army Infantry
Armoured Forces of the Red Army
Soviet Air Forces
Soviet Navy
Partisans
Red Army Female personnel
Corps of Drums, Ivan Bohun Military High School
Tri-Service Colour Guard
Composite Russian-Ukrainian contingent
Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky Independent Presidential Guard Regiment
45th Guards Spetsnaz Brigade
Military Academy of Belarus
National Defense University
95th Air Assault Brigade
Military Institute of Telecommunications and Information Technologies
15th Transport Aviation Brigade
Koroliov Military Institute (National Aviation University)
Ivan Kozhedub National Air Force University
36th Separate Marine Brigade of the Ukrainian Naval Infantry
National Security Service Academy
National Academy of Internal Affairs
21st Brigade of the Internal Troops of Ukraine
Kharkiv National Civil Defense University, State Emergency Service of Ukraine


== Other jubilee parades ==
The Kyiv parade was the center of the 65th anniversary celebrations, with 2,000 military personnel and about 100 units of military equipment were
brought to celebrate Victory Day with parades in other Ukrainian cities. 1,040 Russian troops took part in the parades in four Ukrainian cities: Sevastopol, Kerch, Odesa and Mykolaiv. In turn, 75 cadets from the Hetman Petro Sahaidachnyi National Ground Forces Academy participated in the Moscow Victory Day Parade on Red Square.


== Gallery ==

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


== See also ==
2010 Moscow Victory Day Parade
2010 Minsk Victory Day Parade


== References ==